When theta equals zero, you get the two-dimensional Fourier spectrum profile as a one-dimensional profile along the u-axis. How do you get this special-case profile along the single line u? Set theta to zero. You obtain vertical integrals. Vertical integrals give you a one-dimensional signal. You perform a one-dimensional Fourier transform, and you get the spectrum. So you do the physical measurement to get this profile; you perform the one-dimensional Fourier transform; you get the projection profile along this line. In the case I just showed, this line corresponds to theta equals zero, along the u-axis.

In this way, you recover Fourier-space information along only one line. With an X-ray measurement, you recover Fourier-domain information. Ideally, you want all the Fourier information recovered. Then you perform the two-dimensional inverse Fourier transform and reconstruct the underlying image f of x, y. The Fourier slice theorem is not limited to theta equals zero. The theorem claims that for arbitrary theta, this holds true. For an arbitrary theta, you have an arbitrary one-dimensional projection profile. You perform the one-dimensional Fourier transform and recover the profile along the corresponding line. As explained earlier, if you keep theta changing from zero to one hundred eighty degrees, the line sweeps the whole Fourier space, and you recover all the information. That is the idea.

Now the heuristic: if you have the vertical projection property proved as such, you can immediately understand that the general case must be true. Why? Because the two-dimensional Fourier transform has a rotation property. If you rotate the object by thirty degrees, the two-dimensional Fourier spectrum is also rotated by thirty degrees. Since the angle theta is arbitrary due to the rotation property, you can select the angle as you set up the system. So if you ask, “I have this projection profile; I perform a one-dimensional Fourier transform; will I get the same type of profile along the corresponding line?” The answer is yes. I can select my x-axis along that direction and my y-axis perpendicular to it. In this rotated x–y coordinate, I can use exactly what I explained. Therefore, the Fourier slice theorem must be true. You can understand this immediately from the rotation property of the two-dimensional Fourier transform.

We can also do it mathematically. We introduce a rotated coordinate system t, s. For u, v, we introduce t, s; and actually this t, s is better placed in the x–y space. So we move this to the x–y plane.